---
layout: post
title:  "banks are endangered because of bad IT management"
date:   2018-06-10 10:18:00
---

Some lyric before I start talking about broad things...

Being proficient in IT become matter of survival for banks, because 
monopoly of banks as financial services providers is being challenged by many 
great IT companies. Apple, Google, Facebook, Uber, Yandex are just a few among them. 
These companies have superior IT culture and software is those primary business 
and they are working hard to get piece of banking pie.

I am pretty sure that banks who will not be able to adapt will pass away 
in horizon of maybe 10-20 year , I am just guessing here as world developed in non linear fashion, 
but direction is clear. 
For example why would I keep my money in bank if there would be 
non volatile, government approved crypto currency and multiple service providers on top of this currency.

By adapt I mean they need to fix those IT or even become proper IT company. 
Banks historically have relatively mediocre IT culture and seems 
that management of most banks still does not realize that fact. I worked in 3 of them 
and have heard from my friends about 4 others - so this statistic covers good portion of major banks.

I would like to put few words what is wrong with banks IT 
and what needs to be done to fix it ( though I do not believe that management
have enough courage to do that as transformation of this size is always a risk).

///


There is serious problem with middle management.

It is quite common for middle management not having serious IT background 
and this is crucial.
 
These people often do not understand how software development works. 
Steeve Jobs once told that best managers are those who were grown up in IT and never wanted to be 
a manager. These guys are too frustrated being managed by "born to be a manager" managers.
This is american model vs japan model. American model assumes that you can be trained to 
be a manager right away japan one says you need to get programmer experience first.


These kind of managers consider programmers as a resource
and performance of team in those minds is just linear function from programmers head count.
This misconception revealed many years ago ( you can read "mythycal man month" for example)
but still this perception is not uncommon in banks. 
 
As soon as they do not understand IT they like to have layers of architects and scrum masters 
who in those opinion shapes herd of programmers.

But scrum process work the way "shit in shit out" - I mean squad of mediocre programmers as "input"
cant deliver anything than shit on "output" even with herd of running and dancing scrum masters around.

 
but I often see super capable guys not appreciated because they
cant make sweet talks, but they are great contributors. I see that these kind of guys often shadowed and
those acheivements assigned to wrong person. This for sure descourage this kind of guys to work and they just move
to different company with better culture. So qualification level of programmers decreased because of this process.
Technical ability is disregarded.


Responsibility.

Banks often have 2 different hierachies IT and business.
Business people put money on the table, IT provides solutions.

Business in banks knows what they are doing and if they "fucked up" they fucked up,
and they have IT department which they do not understand.
They hire some sweet guy as head of this department who knows how to talk to business but 
not how to make software and that is the issue. 

This guy can sit in this position for years wasting budget and dressing up results 
as soon as IT is not transparent at all to  business guy and they keep giving the money.

And often they do not have direct dependency efforts - money.

What you gonna do with deliveries if you are kind of not capable ?
As soon as these guys report to next managers who do not understand IT either 
they easily dressing up those deliveries as success. 
Presentation becomes important not realization.


a. they often pursue short term targets that is hacky and creates a lot of problems going further
They choose short deliveries instead of shoosing long and righ from IT perspective processes.
So they get bulky full of legacy system and operates with it with mediocre programmers
where one programmer is just a resource...

They are too concerned about securing those work positions.

 





Vicious circle.

There is another self maintaining inefficientcy.

Banks generally do not have superior reputation among soft developing community 
because they have a lot of burocracy, legacy systems etc.

If bank does not provide solid good premia over average market rate
you will only be able to hire mediocre programmers.

Not sexy people create not sexy products, they are usually 
unable to transform and shape legacy systems into proper ones.



Hiring of mediocre programmers is another problem. I will describe why.



As soon as banks guys do not have enough qualification managers 
choose to run legacy systmes as long as possible this creates 
huge tech debt that getting expensive every year.



I know that google,facebook hiring process have a lot of false negative rejects,
and I know why they are so picky even if those programmers sometime overqualified 
for work they do. 
The thing is simple - once you start lowering bar it will trend to that direction.

Steeve Jobs once said that manager of A class tries to hire A+ and manager of B class 
tries to hire C class.

 
